URL: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/internship-search-tips-jennifer-christine-madamba-mba/ 
Title: Internship Search Tips
Author: Jennifer-Christine Madamba, MBA
Date: Dec 21 2020


Looking and applying for internships is a whole other job. Juggling school, extracurriculars, and part-time jobs (some students also have full-time jobs as well!). Adding searching for an internship into the mix doesn't make it easier. Here are some tips to help you with the search process that I've learned as a former student applying to internships and as someone who has had recruitment experience from different companies:1) Keep a spreadsheet of all the internship positions that you applied forRecruiter: "Hello! This is (Insert name here) calling from (COMPANY) in regards to an internship position that you applied for."Candidate: "Hello! Sorry, who? From where?"I've been on both sides of this call. There was a point where was I applying for so many internships that I forgot to keep track of where I applied to. The company sounded vaguely familiar.I've also talked to a candidate who is confused about the company or says they've never heard of us, but it catches me off guard because they're the ones who applied for the position.Make a spreadsheet with the following columns:Date of when you appliedCompany NameName of the positionA link to the website of that companyYour Status - "Application Submitted", "Interview", "No Offer", "Offer". (These are just some examples. You can make it whatever you want!)Other Comments: Perhaps the internship is during the school year, perhaps it just during the summer, perhaps the internship requires you to work nights and weekends. Perhaps, this was the internship that your professor or your next door neighbor referred you too. Any comments to help you remember the internship position helps!2) Save a copy of the job posting.Most of the time, job postings go away after the positions are closed. Save a copy of the job posting as a PDF in an Internship Folder on your desktop. That way, if you are contacted by a recruiter for a position, you can go back to the copy of the job posting and refer to it during your interview.3) Look at both the position title AND the position description.An Accounting Intern at one company won't do the same projects and tasks as another Accounting Intern at another company. Look at both the position title and its description. Also, some job titles may not be as exciting as others, but they may give you the work experience that you've been looking for.If you're offered two jobs, look a the position description to determine which projects and tasks you could add to your resume. Ask yourself, which job description would get me my dream job?4) LinkedIn SearchesLook at the profile of someone who's in your dream job. Look where they interned or volunteered at. Check out the websites of those companies and organizations to see if they are hiring for interns. Also, while you're at it, check to see what professional organizations they were/are a part of.A lot of your classmates may be putting up posts on LinkedIn of where they got their internships for next summer. Take note of those companies. Check if their website to see if they are still hiring. If they're not hiring, at least you know for the following summer which companies offer internships.5) Utilize Every 👏 Single 👏 Resource 👏Check with your Career Centers, follow companies on LinkedIn, follow Recruiters on LinkedIn, check job search sites, and ask your Professors, friends, and others in your network to see what kind of internship opportunities there are. Do informational interviews. Use your network. :)Also, think about what you use on a daily basis. For example, my planner, I bought from Target. Do they offer internships? I watch Netflix and HBO Max. Do they offer internships? The companies of my utilities - electricity, gas, etc. Do they offer internships? The car I drive. Does Toyota offer internships? I'm typing this article on my MacBook. Does Apple offer internships?These are just a few tips that have helped me and helped others as well. What other tips do you have for those searching for internships or careers in general?