URL: https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/resumes-cover-letters/resume-for-first-year-college-student
Title: What To Put on a Resume for First-Year College Student
Author: Jamie Birt
Date: Jan 29 2025

Going to college provides you with a range of professional, educational and extracurricular activities to start building your career. After your first year of college, you'll likely start applying to internships, fellowships, jobs and other ways to enrich your education. Having an organized, compelling, well-written resume can connect you with many opportunities that start building toward a career or an advanced degree.
In this article, we explain what to include on your resume as a first-year college student and how to display the information in a professional, engaging manner.

Why do you need a resume as a first-year college student?
During your first year in college, having a resume prepared can have several direct benefits on your college experience and professional development. Even if you don't plan on getting a full-time job until you graduate from college, you may still need a resume for other opportunities. Preparing your first-year college student resume early on can help you in the following ways:
Increasing opportunities: It's much easier to apply for opportunities when you already have basic application materials ready. By writing a resume in advance, you can get an early start when applying for opportunities and make sure that you don't accidentally miss submission deadlines.
Gaining practice: Throughout your career, you'll need to rewrite and update your resume multiple times to suit different situations, reflect a career change or incorporate new experiences. Writing a resume at the beginning of your college education can help you start practicing the resume-writing skills that you'll need for the rest of your work life.
Simplifying recommendation letters: College students need recommendation letters from teachers and professional references for a variety of purposes. It's common for college professors to ask you for a copy of your resume to give them inspiration for their recommendation letters.
Identifying areas for growth: Writing a resume is a great way to take a holistic look at your overall experience. As you write your resume, you may notice gaps or areas you'd like to improve upon. This can give you the initiative to get involved with extracurricular activities, seek out mentorship or take classes in certain areas to gain more knowledge and skills.
Related: How to Write an Entry-Level Resume

What situations require a resume?
As a first-year college student, you can adapt your resume to several purposes. Here are some of the top situations requiring a resume that you might encounter as a first-year college student:
Internships
Grants and scholarships
Research assistantships
Part-time jobs
Work-study programs
Transferring to another college
You can save a standard copy of your resume and make small adjustments to aim the content of your resume toward each program, school or employer.
Related: How To Write an Internship Resume That Will Get You Hired
Can you write a resume as a first-year college student with no work experience?
Even if you don't have any work experience as a first-year college student, you can write a functional resume. Employers and programs that consider accepting first-year college students understand that they may have had limited professional opportunities while working on their studies. Your no-experience resume should focus on your academic accomplishments and coursework, hobbies and interests, club involvement and volunteering experience. Even something as simple as a group project can strengthen your resume if it shows off your skills, potential and aptitude for success.
Related: Writing a Resume With No Experience

How should you organize a first-year college student resume?
You can format your college resume in an organized way by sorting your experience and qualifications into categories. Under each header, you can add specific information about the significance of each part of your experience. The main sections to include are:
Header with contact information
Introduction, summary or objective
Education
Professional experience
Activities
Honors and awards
Skills
Using bullet points to organize your resume details is a good way to make your application readable and improve its overall clarity. When describing activities, work experience and awards, list the information in reverse chronological order, with the most recent details at the top. Here is one example of an honors section formatted correctly:
National Merit Scholar (2020)
ACT Scholarship Recipient (2020)
Habitat for Humanity Special Recognition Award (2019)
Girl Scouts of America Gold Award (2017)
Related: How To List Honors on Your Resume

What is the best format for a resume header?
Your resume header should be located at the top center of your resume. It should start with your name in a large font, followed by your email, phone number and current address in a smaller font on their own lines. If you have a personal email and a school email, use your school email. Your header should be large enough to catch the reader's attention without taking up valuable space on the page. An example header without formatting might look like:
Allison Maxwell
allison.maxwell@school.edu
555-555-5555
432 Main St, Philadelphia PA 19019
Related: Resume Headings for Listing Your Experience

Is a resume summary or a resume objective better?
Resume summaries and resume objectives are two popular ways to introduce the content of your resume. They're both brief statements describing who you are as a professional and student. Which one to use depends on why you're writing the resume. Resume summaries are general descriptions of your goals and strengths, while resume objectives are targeted statements explaining why you'd excel in a specific situation.
A resume summary is ideal for posting your general experience on job boards and professional social media, sharing your experience with professional contacts or reaching out to a specific company that you want to work for. Resume objectives are good for when you're applying to a single role or program and want to explain why you're an ideal fit.
For example, here is an example resume summary for a first-year college student studying graphic design:
Creative, passionate graphic design student with experience in InDesign, Photoshop and Affinity, producing bright, polished advertising design materials with a focus on minimalism.
Here is a resume objective for that same student:
Innovative, artistic graphic design student seeking to apply technical skills in design software and illustration to a design internship at Calloway Advertising.
Related: A Complete Resume Summary Guide (40+ Examples)
What education information goes on a resume?
Your educational qualifications should be one of the first sections on your resume. As a recent high school graduate and first-year college student, you should include both details about your high school and your college. Feature this information in order:
Name of college
City and state of college
Expected year of graduation
Major and minor
GPA
Name of high school
City and state of high school
Graduation year
GPA
Test scores
For example:
Texas State University '24 (expected)
San Marcos, TX
Major in biology, minor in physics
3.2 GPA
Little Elm High School '20
Little Elm, TX
3.6 GPA
SAT: 1350
ACT: 29
Related: How to Write a College Student Resume

Can you list classes on a first-year college student resume?
The value you get out of taking engaging, relevant coursework can add to your resume, especially if you don't have much professional experience or involvement with extracurricular activities. You can create a sub-section under the education header or put classes in a separate category. List the name of the course and describe a summary of the content or your contributions to the class. Only include classes that you see as relevant to your professional or academic career. For example:
Relevant coursework

Human Anatomy and Physiology: Advanced review of the impact of nutrition on physical evolution of the human body.

Nutrition Informatics: Discussing micronutrients in relation to balanced meal planning and their effect on immune disorders and cognitive function.
Related: How to Include Relevant Coursework on a Student Resume

What counts as professional experience for a first-year college student?
Job experience is the traditional content for the professional experience section of a resume, but first-year college student can include other kinds of experience as well. Employers and admissions boards understand that first-year college students are just beginning their careers and may focus on alternative forms of experience.
When determining if one of your activities or accomplishments qualifies as professional experience, think about the skills you gained. If you can talk about an impact you made using professional skills, you can include it on a resume. Even jobs that aren't related to your career path, like babysitting or mowing lawns, can be framed as a professional experience. Some common types of experiences are:
Internships
Volunteer positions
Publications
Events
Community projects
Part-time or summer jobs
Here is an example of a good professional experience section that doesn't include any full-time jobs:
Experience
Usher - Dallas Community Center
2014 - Present
Greets guests enthusiastically and welcomes new members to contribute to a friendly and accepting environment
Printed, prepared and distributed itineraries, community activity descriptions and supplementary information to keep the center engaged
Petsitter and dogwalker
2017 - 2020
Implemented animal training techniques to form a positive trusting relationship with pets during walks
Observed animal behavior to identify any indications of health issues or injuries and communicated with owners to prioritize their wellbeing
Planner - Mental Health Awareness 5K
Summer 2019
Scheduled and booked the route for runners to follow to provide a safe, authorized location for walkers and runners
Advertised through social media platforms and community groups to personally sign up over 200 individual 5K participants
Related: Student Resume Examples (And How To Create One)
Should you include hobbies on a first-year college student resume?
If your resume seems short and you want to add information, you can talk about your hobbies. Make sure you only list hobbies that are appropriate to discuss in a professional environment. Hobbies can be especially useful on a resume if you've been participating for a long time and can use them to demonstrate your passion, commitment and dedication. You should list hobbies in the activities section alongside any clubs, sports or involvement with the arts.
Here is an example activities section that effectively incorporates the hobbies of cooking and camping:
Activities
Claremont College Poetry Club
2020 - Present
Coordinates biweekly themed poetry readings on campus to enrich personal growth and creative expression among attendees
Creates monthly bulletins and newsletters to enhance communication between club members
Writes and performs original pieces to engage with important topics and connect with others
Home cooking
2010 - Present
Interprets complex new recipes to produce restaurant-quality meals while maintaining an organized workspace
Attends regular cooking classes to learn and practice technical abilities like knife skills, cooking chemistry and plating
Camping
2015 - 2018
Organized primitive wilderness survival trips both solo and in groups to practice orienteering, first aid and knot-tying
Scouted ideal locations for campsites using observation skills and critical thinking to predict challenges related to the environment
Related: 9 College Resume Tips + Examples
What are the best skills for a first-year college student's resume?
As a first-year college student, you can include both technical skills related to practical tasks and soft skills related to how you interact with yourself and others. Examples of skills you can list on your resume include:
Leadership
Language proficiency
Communication
Customer service
Problem-solving
Active listening
Attention to detail
Time management
Flexibility
Related: 10 Best Skills To Include on a Resume (With Examples)

How long should a resume be for a first-year college student?
As a first-year college student, your resume should be one page long with standard margins and font sizes. If your resume extends beyond a page, re-read each of your entries and consider how to make them more concise. Combine bullet points, remove repetitive information or use short synonyms to replace long phrases.
If your resume is much shorter than a page, try adding more information to your summary section or building on your experience section with more details. First-year college students with limited experience can include more bullet points for each category, while those with more experience may only use one or two bullets for each example of job experience or involvement with activities.
Related: How Long Should a Resume Be?
Upgrade your resume
Showcase your skills with help from a resume expert

Do references go on a resume?
Personal and professional references are people who have agreed to talk with employers or admissions representatives about your character and qualifications. Your references should not go on the same page as your resume. Type your references up in a separate document where you list each person's name, relationship to you and contact information.
To upload the template into Google Docs, go to File > Open > and select the correct downloaded file.

The information on this site is provided as a courtesy and for informational purposes only. Indeed is not a career or legal advisor and does not guarantee job interviews or offers